---
title: DMCM2025 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2025/abstracts/s16
---

[[back to the DMCM'25 Programme]](https://disease-maps.io/DMCM2025/programme/)

**Title:** \
ClinicalUnitMapping.Com Takes a Small Step Towards Machine Comprehension of Clinical Trial Data

**Authors:** \
Jacob Barhak and Joshua Schertz

**Abstract:** \
ClinicalTrials.Gov is the database storing data from clinical trials. Many clinical trials are required to report their findings in this database according to U.S. law. On 2022-08-26 this database held 425,969 clinical trials with 55,248 trials having numeric results. However, the data is not standardized and numerical data cannot be comprehended since the units are not standardized. There were 36,752 unique units of measure compared to 2019-04-12 when there were 24,548 unique units of measure. It is an increase of 12,204 units over roughly 40 months - almost 10 new unique units of measure added per day. To use the numerical data in disease modeling, there is a need to have machine support to standardize this data. Such standardization is necessary if we wish to use such data in computational models.

ClinicalUnitMapping.com is a web tool constructed to help standardize this data and merge it with the following standards and specifications: UCUM, RTMMS / IEEE 11073-10101, BIOUO, and CDISC. IEEE 11073-10101 - Adapted and reprinted with permission from IEEE. Copyright IEEE 2019. All rights reserved.

This presentation will discuss how python tools are used to: 1) Process and index the data, 2) Find similar units using NLP and machine learning, 3) Create a web interface to support user mapping of those units, 4) Use advanced machine learning tools such as transformers for Natural Language Processing (NLP) to drive inference and core-sets to speed up labeling and quickly setup an inference engine.

This project is ongoing and this presentation is constantly updated for each venue. This presentation will focus on latest improvements of supervised learning using transformers and accelerated labeling and unit inference. The latest interactive presentation with results is accessible through: https://www.clinicalunitmapping.com/show/Unit_Mapping_Latest.html

The intention is to unify unit standards and machine learning tools that will be able to map all units reported by clinical trials. With such capabilities, the data in this important clinical trials database would become machine comprehensible.