---
title: DMCM2025 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2025/abstracts/s4
---

[[back to the DMCM'25 Programme]](https://disease-maps.io/DMCM2025/programme/)

**Title:** \
Shared and unique mechanisms of IMIDs: atopic dermatitis and ulcerative colitis disease maps

**Authors:** \
Oxana Lopata, Reinhard Schneider, Venkata Satagopam, and Marek Ostaszewski

**Abstract:** \
Immune-mediated inflammatory diseases (IMIDs) characterised by high prevalence and high costs of treatment. Current management of IMIDs needs a better understanding of mechanisms and biomarkers to improve, especially chronic and progressive diseases with limited treatment options such as atopic dermatitis (AD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). To this end, we developed AD and UC disease maps covering molecular mechanisms of AD and UC.

Recent research suggests a potential link between chronic skin diseases and gastrointestinal disorders. Although AD and UC affect different anatomical sites, AD predominantly impacts the skin and UC primarily targets the colon and rectum, they share similar immune dysregulatory mechanisms such as aberrant Th cell activation and persistent barrier dysfunction, driven by specific genetic predisposition and environmental triggers.

Our systematic, interactive and computational comparison of AD and UC identifies cross-disease and disease-specific signatures and common pathological pathways. Results of this analysis provide insight into shared biomarkers to predict disease progression and therapy outcome. The AD and UC disease maps are unique resources that enable representation and exploration of common and specific mechanisms in these diseases. This can help to shift IMID management from organ-based symptom relief to mechanism-based treatments.