---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S12
---

**Title:** \
Computational modelling of High Grade Serous Ovarian Cancer

**Authors:** \
Marco Fariñas

**Abstract:** \
High Grade Serous Ovarian Cancer (HGSOC) is a lethal gynaecological malignancy with progressively resistant metastases. Patients with HGSOC typically display poor prognostic outcomes mainly due to late-state diagnosis and post-neoadjuvant chemotherapy resistance recurrence. In addition, suitable treatments proved to be effective and to improve survival rates are not neither abundant nor personalized, being platinum-based chemotherapy, the most common strategy chosen by clinicians to overcome the disease. Although first-line chemotherapy is normally successful, if relapse occurs, the tumor is no-longer drug sensitive. Therefore, there is a need in understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the pro-resistant transformation to ultimately design novel and targeted therapies suitable for HGSOC patients. To study in detail the HGSOC oncogenic signature, we have analyzed publicly available genomics and transcriptomics data from more that five hundred HGSOC patients. This data served to infer genome-wide scale transcription factor activities, somatic-mutation co-occurrences, and the distribution of copy number alterations. In addition, results from the multiomics analysis were used to train a large-scale Boolean model representing the oncogenic related signaling occurring in HGSOC. Following its experimental validation using 3D cultures, the model will be used to study potential new targets and drug synergies. In addition, we are using finishing to construct a Boolean module encoding intercellular signaling events driven by proteolytic cascades involving tumor cells, stromal cells, and the extracellular matrix. 

