---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S14
---

[[back to the DMCM'24 Programme]](https://disease-maps.org/DMCM2024/programme/)

**Title:** \
Protein Structures and their cross-referencing in UniProt

**Authors:** \
Dr Nidhi Tyagi and Uniprot Consortium

**Abstract:** \
Annotation of proteins from structure-based analyses is an integral component of the UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB). There are nearly 210,000 experimentally determined 3-dimensional structures of proteins deposited in the Protein Data Bank. UniProt works closely with the Protein Databank in Europe (PDBe) to map these 3D structural entries to the corresponding UniProtKB entries based on comprehensive sequence and structure-based analyses, to ensure that there is a UniProtKB record for each relevant PDB record and to import additional data such as ligand-binding sites from PDB to UniProtKB.

SIFTS (Structure Integration with Function, Taxonomy and Sequences), which is a collaboration between the Protein Data Bank in Europe (PDBe) and UniProt, facilitates the link between the structural and sequence features of proteins by providing correspondence at the level of amino acid residues. A pipeline combining manual and automated processes for maintaining up-to-date cross-reference information has been developed and is run with every weekly PDB release. Various criteria are considered to cross-reference PDB and UniProtKB entries such as a) the degree of sequence identity (>90%) b) an exact taxonomic match (at the level of species, subspecies and specific strains for lower organisms) (c) preferential mapping to a curated UniProtKB/SwissProt entry (if one exists) or (d) mapping to proteins from Reference/Complete proteome or (e) mapping to the longest protein sequence expressed by the gene. Complex cases are inspected manually by a UniProt biocurator using a dedicated curation interface to ensure accurate cross-referencing. These cases include short peptides, chimeras, synthetic constructs and de novo designed polymers.

The SIFTS initiative also provides up to date cross referencing of structural entries to literature (PubMed), taxonomy (NCBI), Enzyme database, Gene Ontology annotations (GO), protein family classification databases (InterPro, Pfam, SCOP and CATH).

In addition to maintaining accurate mappings between UniProtKB and PDB, a pipeline has been developed to automatically import data from PDB to enhance the unreviewed records in UniProtKB/TrEMBL. This includes details of residues involved in the binding of biologically relevant molecules including substrate, nucleotides, metals, drugs, carbohydrates and post-translational modifications that greatly improves the biological content of these records.

UniProt has successfully completed the non-trivial and labour intensive exercise of cross referencing 202,542 PDB entries (738,398 polypeptide chains) to 64,436 UniProtKB entries. Manual annotation of protein entries with 3D-structures is given high priority and such proteins are curated based on relevant literature. UniProt also provides structural predictions through AlphaFold for almost all proteomes in the UniProtKB database.

UniProt, diseases and protein structures: There are 7706 manually curated protein entries with keyword ‘disease’ in UniProt. Out of these, 3286 protein entries are associated with a 3D structure. Information on mutations, functions, natural variants, active site, binding sites, interactions, developmental stage and activity regulation etc can be found on the UniProt site.

In the UniProt database, the 'Disease/Phenotypes and variants' section provides information on the disease(s) associated with genetic variations in a given protein. The information is extracted from the scientific literature and diseases that are also described in the OMIM. It also provides information on allergenic properties, disruption phenotype, biotechnological and pharmaceutical use etc.

All this work enables non-expert users to see protein entries in the light of relevant biological context such as metabolic pathways, genetic information, molecular functions, conserved motifs and interactions etc. Structural information in UniProtKB serves as a vital dataset for various academic and biomedical research projects.

