---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S17
---

**Title:** \
Integrating genetic variation with protein function and human disease information through protein curation in UniProtKB

**Authors:** \
Yvonne C. Lussi, Elena Speretta, Kate Warner, Michele Magrane, Sandra Orchard and Uniprot Consortium

**Abstract:** \
The UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) is a leading resource of protein information, providing the research community with a comprehensive, high quality and freely accessible platform of protein sequences and functional information. Manual curation of a protein entry includes sequence analysis, annotation of functional information from literature and the identification of orthologs in model organisms. For human entries, we also provide information on disease involvement, including the annotation of genetic variants associated with a human disease, using the ACMG guidelines for the assessment of clinical significance of variants. The information is extracted from scientific literature and from the OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) database.
Our current focus lies on the curation of proteins with a new gene-disease relation as published by OMIM, the annotation of protein variants with characterization of protein impact available from literature, and the curation of proteins associated with a human disease with new functional information not yet available in UniProt. Identifying the underlying genetic variation and its functional consequences in a disease is essential for understanding disease mechanisms. Model organism research is integral to unravelling the molecular mechanisms of human disease. Therefore, information of human proteins involved in disease is supplemented with data from protein orthologs in model organisms, providing additional information on protein function based on mutagenesis assays and disruption phenotypes.
With these efforts, we aim to enhance the functionality of UniProt as a platform to integrate genetic variation data with their functional consequences on protein properties and disease mechanisms.

