---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S19
---

**Title:**
Hipathia and Metabolizer: Unveiling Disease Mechanisms and Enabling Personalized Medicine

**Authors:**
Kinza Rian, Marta R. Hidalgo, Cankut Çubuk, Carlos Loucera, Maria Peña-Chilet and Joaquin Dopazo

**Abstract:**
Complex diseases have intricate pathophysiological behavior that necessitate advanced system biology approaches to understand their molecular mechanism.
One of these system biology approaches is using knowledge resources, such as Kegg and disease maps.
Such resources allow investigating complex mechanisms and analyzing them from much more computational angle. The knowledge in such resources can be translated into mechanistic models and be integrated with omics datasets.
Hereby, we aim to present two powerful frameworks, Hipathia and Metabolizer, facilitating the integration of omics data with the knowledge resources. Hipathia and Metabolizer allow the analysis and interpretation of high-throughput data, providing valuable insights into signaling and metabolic networks
Hipathia identifies key genes and signaling pathways associated with specific diseases. The method translates individual gene expression values (and/or gene mutations) into accurate measurements of changes in the activity of signaling circuits. These circuits ultimately constitute high-throughput estimations of cell functionalities caused by gene activity within the pathway.
Metabolizer plays a crucial role in studying metabolic pathways and identifying potential biomarkers. Using transcriptomic data, Metabolizer calculates the impact of modules on production of metabolites -These modules are a conserved part of metabolism which starts with substrate(s) and ends with a product.
Hipathia and Metabolizer utilize omics data at both the cohort and individual levels, as well as comparisons between case and control groups.
Hipathia and Metabolizer help in disentangling the complex interaction of multiple biomolecules in signaling and metabolic pathways that are associated with various diseases. They are useful in identifying essential therapeutic targets and biomarkers for better and personalized treatment facilities.

