---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S20
---

**Title:**
Integrated network resources to map cell-cell and cell-microbe interactions  in inflammation, infection and cancer

**Authors:**
Tamas Korcsmaros

**Abstract:**
In the era of Big Data, data collection underpins biological research more so than ever before. In many cases this can be as time-consuming as the analysis itself, requiring downloading multiple different public databases, with different data structures, and in general, spending days before answering any biological questions. To solve this problem, we recently introduced an open-source, cloud-based Big Data platform, called Sherlock (https://earlham-sherlock.github.io/). Sherlock provides a gap-filling way for computational biologists to store, convert, query, share and generate biology data, while ultimately streamlining bioinformatics data management.

Our group focuses on Big Data analysis using multi-layered networks to model and understand biological systems. We have developed and maintained a range of web resources supporting researchers' network biology analyses. These include SignaLink (http://signalink.org), an integrated resource to analyze cellular signaling pathway cross-talk, transcription factors, miRNAs and regulatory enzymes; AutophagyNet (http://AutophagyNet.org), a comprehensive database to study autophagy regulation in various cell types; SalmoNet (http://salmonet.org), an integrated multi-layered network containing regulatory, metabolic and protein-protein interactions for 20 Salmonella strains classified as either gastro-intestinal or extra-intestinal pathogens.

We recently created CytokineLink, a communication map between major tissue and blood cell types that reveal how cytokine-mediated intercellular networks form during homeostatic and disease conditions. We collated the most prevalent cytokines from the literature and assigned the proteins and their corresponding receptors to source tissue and blood cell types based on enriched consensus RNA-Seq data from the Human Protein Atlas database.

To map host-microbe interactions and how they rewire host signaling processes, we developed the MicrobioLink pipeline. We recently used MicrobioLink to predict the cell-specific effects of specific bacterial taxa in healthy and diseased conditions. The current pipeline offers potentially interesting connection points and detailed mechanistic insight - using structural information about proteins - into the relationship between bacteria and host immune cells that will aid in understanding how microbial protein may be of therapeutic value in inflammatory diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease.

