---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S22
---

**Title:** \
Integrated model of host-pathogen interaction in severe infections: the case of severe systemic infection due to P. aeruginosa.

**Authors:** \
Francesco Messina, Claudia Rotondo, Valentina Dimartino, Michele Properzi and Carla Fontana

**Abstract:** \
The combination of omics data, clinical data on patients, and characteristics of pathogens could be a suitable approach to investigate the complexity of deep interaction between host and microbial pathogen. Explorative computational methods, based on network, could allow us to find features affecting the variations of severity in systemic infectious diseases (sepsis). Pseudomonas aeruginosa is one of the most worrying pathogens to public health, and the knowledge of its pathogenic mechanisms could be crucial to finding new successful treatments.
We provided a model of interaction between P. aeruginosa and human host, reporting in detail many pathogenetic mechanisms, the direct on protein–protein and metabolite-protein interactions between P. aeruginosa and human host proteins, the description of pathways activated in organs and tissues involved in severe systemic infections by P. aeruginosa. This model was structured on literature data and a data curation process carried out to extract bacterial proteins-host proteins interactions, considering previous experiences in virus-host interaction models. Moreover, an interactome analysis between host proteins and proteins/metabolites of P. aeruginosa (37 bacterial proteins and 4 molecules Alginate, Pyocyanin, Membrane Phospholipid, Lipid A, and entire molecule LPS) was carried out to better identify host biological responses, as well as peculiar pathways of this infection.
This analysis allowed us to build an integrated model of infection, merging clinical knowledge, the interactions between bacterial proteins and host proteins, as well as biological pathways of infection. The network-based model estimated the role of every bacterial molecule in host cell, highlighting the cell response to severe infections in specific body sites of severe P. aeruginosa infection, such as lung and bloodstream. In particular, high similarity to infection pathways of other pathogens and the triggering of complement and coagulation cascade was identified, while bacterial molecules, like Pyocyanin and Alginate, could stimulate innate immunity, as well as induce platelet activation.
In conclusion, the activity of data curation in this work, as well as in-silico explorative analysis, provided an overview of interaction mechanisms between pathogens and hosts in specific body sites, giving new elements to define relevant pathways involved in this severe infection, but also proposing a new explorative model to other severe systemic infections. 

