---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S24
---

**Title:** \
Side-by-side comparison of mechanisms of psoriasis and atopic dermatitis: an interactive explorable model

**Authors:** \
Oxana Lopata, Marcio Luis Acencio, Reinhard Schneider, Venkata Satagopam and Marek Ostaszewski

**Abstract:** \
Psoriasis (Pso) and atopic dermatitis (AtoD) are chronic inflammatory skin diseases characterized by impaired epidermal barrier, severe skin inflammation, pruritus and dysregulation of immune response. These features are emerging from a complex interplay between genetic components and environmental triggers. Despite these common features, the molecular pathology of AtoD and PsO are different as reported in recent publications. Currently, there are no resources enabling systematic and interactive exploration of different mechanisms of these diseases. Knowledge is scattered in texts and static figures in papers. As part of the BIOMarkers in Atopic Dermatitis and Psoriasis (BIOMAP) project, we have developed two different disease maps, one covering the molecular mechanisms of Pso and other - mechanisms of AtoD. In order to make it possible for users to compare Pso and AtoD mechanisms in a systematic and interactive way, we also developed an overview map where key events and outcomes of the two diseases are shown side by side to highlight similar and different features - cell types, molecules and signaling pathways. Our main focus is on common and unique mechanisms for Pso and AtoD that include Th-type cell involvement, ILC-type inflammation and pruritus mechanisms. This resource is a promising tool for representing and exploring similarities and differences in these common inflammatory skin diseases.

