---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S26
---

[[back to the DMCM'24 Programme]](https://disease-maps.org/DMCM2024/programme/)

**Title:** \
Physiological Map and Disease Ontology in the ONTOX Project: Application to the Neural Tube Closure

**Authors:** \
Alessio Gamba, Job Berkhout, Luiz Ladeira, Harm Heusinkveld, Aldert Piersma, Marc Teunis, Thomas Luechtefeld, Thomas Hartung, Liesbet Geris and Bernard Staumont

**Abstract:** \
In recent years, many animal-free approaches for chemical and pharmaceutical hazard and risk assessment have been developed. In particular, QSAR and Read Across models have demonstrated high predictive accuracy [1], even if they still have limitations: the predictions rely on chemical structures, missing a mechanistic explanation of the toxicity, and the models are normally trained on data from animal tests, not perfectly correlating with human toxicities.

To overcome these limitations, within the European H2020 ONTOX project [2], we developed a New Approach Methodology (NAM) focused on understanding the mechanistic biology leading to human toxicity. This Systems Toxicology [3] approach, makes use of large data collection, integrating information from literature, databases, and in vitro experiments. The data are initially retrieved manually, but is planned to have a workflow to collect them using AI. This information is then represented in machine-readable graphical notation, standardized and designed for visualization in a human comprehensive syntax.

The containers of this knowledge are the Physiological Map (PM) and the associated disease ontology map. The PMs is inspired by the Disease Map Project [4], but it only relies on physiological conditions instead of diseases, whereas the ontology provides additional layers of information, extending the PM.

As a practical application of this approach, we present here the case study of Neural Tube Closure (NTC), an extension of the work published in [5]. NTC, a fundamental embryogenic step related to several congenital malformations, is highly sensitive to chemical disturbance, depending on a delicate molecular balance that governs the complex signaling pathways crucial for the closure process.

The PM focuses mainly on the retinoid signaling pathway, intricately connected to genetic control of patterning and morphogenesis, being a well-known target of chemicals that disrupt the NTC. The most relevant embryonic tissues, regulatory pathways, and protein interactions essential for the NTC are represented. The reactions were checked, graphically standardized, and annotated with literature source identifiers. Finally, the PM is visualized on the MINERVA Platform [6] and archived in the BioStudies database.

Being rich in biological mechanisms and related phenotypes, PMs and ontology maps can serve as a basis for parallel or subsequent development of new adverse outcome pathways (AOP) as well as the creation of dynamic models, representing different responses to chemicals perturbations. In conclusion, the PM and ontologies can offer the possibility to study human toxicities from an innovative perspective, qualitatively and quantitatively improving toxicological predictions.


References

1. Manganelli, S., Gamba, A., Colombo, E., & Benfenati, E. (2022). Using VEGAHUB Within a Weight-of-Evidence Strategy. Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.), 2425, 479–495. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-1960-5_18
2. Vinken, M., Benfenati, E., Busquet, F., et al. (2021). Safer chemicals using less animals: kick-off of the European ONTOX project. Toxicology, 458, 152846. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2021.152846
3. Hartung, T., FitzGerald, R. E., Jennings, P., et al. (2017). Systems Toxicology: Real World Applications and Opportunities. Chemical research in toxicology, 30(4), 870–882. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrestox.7b00003
4. Mazein, A., Acencio, M. L., Balaur, I., et al. (2023). A guide for developing comprehensive systems biology maps of disease mechanisms: planning, construction and maintenance. Frontiers in bioinformatics, 3, 1197310. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbinf.2023.1197310
5. Heusinkveld, H. J., Staal, Y. C. M., Baker, N. C., et al. (2021). An ontology for developmental processes and toxicities of neural tube closure. Reproductive toxicology (Elmsford, N.Y.), 99, 160–167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.2020.09.002
6. Hoksza, D., Gawron, P., Ostaszewski, M., Hasenauer, J., & Schneider, R. (2020). Closing the gap between formats for storing layout information in systems biology. Briefings in bioinformatics, 21(4), 1249–1260. https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbz067

