---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S7
---

**Title:** \
Knowledge Graph Generator (KGG): An automated workflow to create disease-specific Knowledge Graphs

**Authors:** \
Reagon Karki, Yojana Gadiya, Andrea Zaliani and Philip Gribbon

**Abstract:** \
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are becoming increasingly popular due to their ability to efficiently support data warehousing. In particular, data consolidation via integration/harmonization of heterogeneous and multi-modal data within a KG makes it an essential resource. In the field of life-sciences, KGs have become an important application of systems biology as they delineate biological and pathophysiological phenomena where the entities are represented with standard ontologies and dictionaries to comply with FAIR data principles. Beside serving as a one-stop information provider, KGs have the potential to answer complex scientific queries and facilitate downstream analyses. Nevertheless, the process of creating KGs is very expensive and time-consuming as it mostly relies on manual data curation from published literature. A number of automatic text-mining workflows have been developed to overcome these issues, however, they still fail to reach the quality of manual curation. To circumvent these limitations, we have developed an automated open-source workflow, namely Knowledge Graph Generator (KGG), by embedding underlying schema of several curated databases (such as OpenTargets, Uniprot, ChEMBL and so on) which resembles a clockwork-esque mechanism. The KGG allows users to create KGs representing the chemotype-phenotype of diseases and medical conditions. Moreover, the users can customize the size and content of KG by choosing parameters affecting scores of proteins and clinical trial phase of chemicals probes/drugs. The final KG is a comprehensive and rational assembly of disease-associated entities such as proteins, protein-related pathways, biological processes and functions, chemicals, mechanism of actions, assays and adverse effects. As a use case, we have compared our KGG-generated Depression model with a text-mined Depression model that was generated by parsing 250K abstracts from PubMed. The results showed better performance of KGG considering the coverage of captured entities and quality of data. Additionally, we have developed workflows which allow chemoinformatics-related profiling/characterization of chemicals captured in the KG.

