---
title: DMCM2024 Abstract
layout: default
permalink: /DMCM2024/Abstracts/S9
---

[[back to the DMCM'24 Programme]](https://disease-maps.org/DMCM2024/programme/)

**Title:** \
Semi-automated workflow to accelerate AOP network construction using SBGN elements: a pilot study

**Authors:** \
Luiz Ladeira, Alexander Mazein, Marek Ostaszewski, Anouk Verhoeven, Julen Sanz Serrano, Annika Drees, Tamara Vanhaecke, Mathieu Vinken, Liesbet Geris and Bernard Staumont

**Abstract:** \
Adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) serve as frameworks connecting molecular initiating events (MIEs) to adverse outcomes (AOs) through key events (KEs), essential for understanding the link between chemical exposure and adverse health effects. In a new approach, artificial intelligence was used by van Ertveld and collaborators (2023) in the data screening & curation phases to accelerate the building of large AOP networks supported by systematic review protocols, introducing a dataset-driven AOP network construction. However, the current standard graphical representation of AOPs could be improved for machine-readability, aligning it with FAIR principles. The Systems Biology Graphical Notation (SBGN) elements enhance AOPs with standardized graphical notation, improving visualization and interpretability and guaranteeing machine-readability, as introduced by Mazein and collaborators (2023). The biology enrichment present in Mazein’s work overlaps with the "KE descriptor" concept in van Ertveld’s, linking biological entities to biological activity (as KE), enhancing mechanistic representation and relevance.
This work aims to strengthen the bridge between toxicology and systems biology by endorsing SBGN as a graphical standard for AOP networks, and proposing a semi-automated workflow to move the field forward. This approach integrates semi-automated data collection and treatment with automated network construction, followed by manual design improvements. Leveraging SBGN and automated methods, we aim to advance standardization, machine-readability, and FAIR compliance in AOP and AOP network development, thus accelerating their construction.
We developed a pilot study on a generic AOP, addressing challenges and opportunities in developing SBGN-based AOP networks and proposing scalable solutions that can be adjusted to meet various demands. Our workflow consists of: a) data checking, annotation and disambiguation; b) automated data processing; c) conversion into a CellDesigner (Funahashi et al., 2008) SBML network, using R scripts applying functions from the minervar package (Gawron et al., 2023); d) manual design editing for improved layout and human interpretability. The MINERVA platform (Hoksza et al., 2020) was used for automated annotation, sharing, visualization & exploration.
The proposed approach leverages established standards and automated methods to expedite machine-readability and ensure FAIR compliance in AOP networks. Utilizing the proposed workflow in constructing AOP networks not only boosts reproducibility and interoperability but also facilitates the development of more realistic and biologically relevant networks. The incorporation of KE descriptors and biology enrichment simultaneously expands mechanistic relevance, improving the overall accuracy and comprehensiveness of the AOP networks. Ultimately, this method will be applied to AOP network case studies in chemical-induced conditions within the ONTOX project (Vinken et al., 2021).

